Resume Genius 
1. Project Setup
1.1 Project Scope
Goal: Create an AI-powered resume builder that enhances resume content and structure using NLP and ML.
Features: Resume parsing, content analysis, ATS optimization, custom recommendations, score & feedback.

1.2. Tools and Technologies selected
Frontend: React.js for building the user interface.
Backend: Node.js and Express for server-side logic.
Machine Learning: Python with libraries like scikit-learn and NLTK for NLP tasks.
Database: MongoDB for storing user data and resumes.

2. Frontend Development pick up
2.1. Set Up React Project
Install Node.js and npm (Node Package Manager) if you haven’t already.

3. Create a React app:
npx create-react-app resume-genius-frontend
cd resume-genius-frontend

4. Install required libraries:
npm install axios react-router-dom

5. Create basic components:

Home Page: Upload resume and display analysis results.
Upload Component: Form for users to upload their resumes.
Results Component: Display analysis results and recommendations.
Integrate with Backend: Use axios to send requests to your backend API.

3. Backend Development
3.1. Set Up Node.js and Express
Create a new directory for your backend:
mkdir resume-genius-backend
cd resume-genius-backend

3.2 Initialize Node.js project:
npm init -y

3.3 Install required packages:
npm install express mongoose body-parser cors

3.4 Create server:
index.js:
(javascript)
const express = require('express');
const mongoose = require('mongoose');
const bodyParser = require('body-parser');
const cors = require('cors');

const app = express();
app.use(cors());
app.use(bodyParser.json());

// Connect to MongoDB
mongoose.connect('mongodb://localhost:27017/resume-genius', {
  useNewUrlParser: true,
  useUnifiedTopology: true,
});

// Define routes here

const PORT = process.env.PORT || 5000;
app.listen(PORT, () => console.log(`Server running on port ${PORT}`));

3.5 Create routes for resume upload and analysis.

4. Machine Learning Development
4.1. Set Up Python Environment
Install Python and pip (Python Package Installer).

4.2 Create a virtual environment:
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  On Windows use `venv\Scripts\activate`

4.3 Install required libraries:
pip install scikit-learn nltk pandas

4.4 Develop ML models for resume analysis:
Model Training: Use scikit-learn to build and train models for keyword optimization and content analysis.
NLP Tasks: Use NLTK for text preprocessing and analysis.

5. Create a REST API in Python to interact with the ML models.

5. Integrate Components
Frontend and Backend Integration:
Configure React to call your Node.js APIs.
Implement error handling and data processing in the frontend.

Backend and ML Integration:
Set up endpoints in Node.js to handle resume uploads and analysis requests.
Use Python scripts to process the resumes and return results to the backend.

6. Testing and Deployment
6.1. Testing
Frontend Testing: Ensure all components render correctly and interact with the backend.
Backend Testing: Test API endpoints with tools like Postman.
Integration Testing: Verify end-to-end functionality of resume upload and analysis.
6.2. Deployment
Frontend: Deploy to platforms like Vercel or Netlify.
Backend: Deploy to cloud services like Heroku or AWS.
ML Model: Host the model API on a server or cloud platform.

7. Documentation
Create a detailed README.md file for your GitHub repository.
Document your code with comments and explanations.
8. Maintenance
Monitor the application for issues.
Update the models and features based on user feedback.

8. Assumptions
User Base:
Assumption: Users are job seekers looking to improve their resumes.
Data Required: Understanding user demographics, job sectors, and resume types.

Resume Formats:
Assumption: Resumes will be in various formats (e.g., PDF, DOCX).
Data Required: Methods for parsing and processing different file formats.

Literature, Language and Content:
Assumption: Resumes will primarily be in English, but there may be some variability in language.
Data Required: Handling multiple languages or regional variations in resume content.

ATS Compatibility:
Assumption: Resumes need to be optimized for Applicant Tracking Systems (ATS).
Data Required: Common ATS requirements and keyword strategies.

Data Privacy:
Assumption: Resume data must be handled securely and comply with privacy regulations.
Data Required: Understanding of data protection laws such as GDPR or CCPA.
Policy- Declare consent and policies with initals of the user as acceptance

9.Data to Consider
Resume Data:
Content: Sections such as experience, education, skills, and achievements.
Structure: Formatting, layout, and organization of information.
Keywords: Industry-specific keywords and phrases relevant to job roles.

User Interaction Data:
Feedback: User feedback on recommendations and overall experience.
Usage Metrics: How users interact with the app, which features are used most frequently.

Benchmark Data:
Successful Resumes: Examples of high-performing resumes and their features.
ATS Data: Information on common ATS filters and criteria.

Machine Learning Model Data:
Training Data: A diverse set of resumes for training the AI model, including successful and unsuccessful examples.
Evaluation Data: A separate set of resumes for testing and validating model performance.

Integration Data:
APIs: Documentation and requirements for integrating with other systems (e.g., job boards, ATS).
External Libraries: Information on libraries and tools for NLP and ML (e.g., scikit-learn, NLTK).

Security Data:
Encryption: Methods for securing data in transit and at rest.
Access Control: How user data will be protected and who has access to it.
Data Collection and Processing

Collect Data:
Use public datasets of resumes if available.
Collect sample resumes from users (with consent) to build your training set.

Preprocess Data:
Extract relevant information from resumes (e.g., skills, experience).
Normalize and clean data for consistency and accuracy.

Analyze Data:
Use statistical and ML techniques to identify patterns and insights.
Continually update models based on user feedback and new data.

10. Sources for Free and Non-Copyrighted Data
Public Datasets
Kaggle Datasets: Kaggle offers a wide range of datasets, including some related to resumes and job applications. Check the dataset’s licensing to ensure it’s free to use. Kaggle Datasets
UCI Machine Learning Repository: A collection of databases, domain theories, and datasets, often used for machine learning research. UCI Repository

Government Data Portals
data.gov: The U.S. government’s open data portal with datasets on a variety of topics. While it may not have specific resume data, it provides open datasets that might be useful. data.gov
EU Open Data Portal: Provides datasets from European Union institutions. EU Open Data

Academic and Research Institutions
Harvard Dataverse: A repository of datasets from research studies and academic work. Look for datasets that are open-access and relevant to your needs. Harvard Dataverse
OpenICPSR: The Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research offers open-access datasets. ICPSR

Open Access Platforms
GitHub: Search for repositories with open data related to resumes or job applications. Repositories often include sample data along with code. GitHub
Google Dataset Search: A search engine for finding datasets across the web. Use it to find datasets that are openly licensed or in the public domain. Google Dataset Search

Public Domain Resources
Common Crawl: Provides large-scale web crawls that are publicly available. This data might include job postings and resume-related content. Common Crawl
Project Gutenberg: While primarily for books, Project Gutenberg’s data can be useful for text analysis and NLP. Project Gutenberg

Creative Commons Licensed Data
Creative Commons Search: Find datasets and other content with Creative Commons licenses. Ensure you check the specific license type to confirm it’s suitable for your project. Creative Commons Search

11. Tips for Using Data
Verify Licensing: Always check the licensing or usage rights associated with any dataset to ensure it is free to use for Resume Genius project purposes.
Data Preprocessing: Even if data is free, it might require preprocessing to fit your needs, especially for resume-specific fields. Read again!
Combine Datasets: To create a comprehensive dataset, you may need to combine multiple sources of data. Outreach and surveys will help.
